.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii tcping.1
.\"
.TH TCPING 1 "MARCH 2023" Linux "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
tcping \- non-blocking TCP connection test
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tcping [-q] [-f
.I <4|6>
.B ] [-t
.I timeout-sec
.B | -u
.I timeout-usec
.B ]
.I host port
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B tcping
attempts to complete a TCP connection to a
.B host:port
combination within the time interval
.B timeout-[u]sec.
The result of the operation is encoded as a return value.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP -q
Quiet flag. Suppress all informational output.
.IP "-f <4|6>"
IP protocol family to use: 4 for IPv4, 6 for IPv6.
If left unspecifed, the implementation will use
the protocol family of the first record returned from
.BR getaddrinfo(3),
based on the format of the
.BR host
parameter.
Specifying
.BR host
as dotted-decimal IPv4 or hex IPv6 address string
will use the respective protocol stack. Specification as a hostname
character string will cause a dependency on the order of IPv4 and IPv6
records returned from
.BR getaddrinfo(3).
.IP "-t timeout-sec"
Connection timeout in seconds.
.IP "-u timeout-usec"
Connection timeout in microseconds.
.IP host
Destination host. Either a host name node name or a numeric host address
string (i.e., a dotted-decimal IPv4 address or an IPv6 hex address), per
RFC 2553.
.IP port
Destination port. Either a service name or a decimal port number,
per RFC 2553.
.SH RETURN VALUES
.B tcping
encodes the result of the connection attempt in its return value:
.IP 0
The connection attempt was successful.
.IP 1
The connection attempt was unsuccessful.
.IP 2
The connection attempt timed out.
.IP 255
An error occured.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Unless the quiet
.B (-q)
flag is set, the following diagnostics are issued on stderr. The messages align
with the program return value (see above).

.B <host>
port
.B <port>
open.
.RS
The connection attempt to
.B host:port
was successful.
.RE
.B <host>
port
.B <port>
closed.
.RS
The connection attempt to
.B host:port
was unsuccessful and the server side signaled a closed port.
.RE
.B <host>
port
.B <port>
user timeout.
.RS
The connection attempt to
.B host:port
did not complete within the user-defined timeout interval.
.SH AUTHOR
Marc Kirchner <mail at marc-kirchner dot de>
.SH HISTORY
.B tcping
came to be in 2002 as a utility to allow basic TCP connection checking and to enable failure shortcircutry
before issuing network commands with long timeouts (on Solarix 2.x, Solaris 7/8, AIX and Linux). IPv6
functionality was added for 2.0.0 in 2023, which also dropped support for the AIX and Solaris OS.
.SH ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Many thanks to Kai Hambrecht, John Smith and Vincent Loriot.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR nc(1)

